Have you ever asked a child,
“Where’s Jehovah?”
Right away their finger goes up.
It’s cute.
We appreciate that their parents
have taught them
some very basic things,
Jehovah’s name as well.
But what if we were to ask
the same question to an adult,
“Where’s Jehovah?”
and they put their hand up
—not so cute.
The question is really deeper than that.
The question,
Where is Jehovah?
is really,
‘Where is Jehovah in my life?
‘Where is Jehovah
when I’m making decisions?
‘What is his will?
What would he like for me to do?’
That’s the question:
‘Where is Jehovah in my life?’
And that’s basically what Jesus Christ
was saying in the model prayer.
There would be a priority in things
that we would request
of our heavenly Father.
If we were to put
our own interests first, our concerns,
that would really be
out of the priority that he outlined.
It’s the sanctification of Jehovah’s name
—which is number one—
and then his Kingdom,
as well as Jehovah’s will.
When Jesus was here on earth,
there was no question
that he put Jehovah first in his life.
Everything he did,
everything he said,
how he treated others
all revolved around Jehovah’s sanctification.
Jesus not only gave the model prayer
but he lived the model prayer.
He worked in perfect harmony
with that prayer,
and he instructed his followers
to do the same
—always try to put Jehovah
as the number one thing in their life
in small decisions
as well as the large decisions.
So he gave the model prayer
as something for us to follow as a model,
as a guide, not word for word,
but the thoughts and the order
of importance within that prayer.
In fact, Jesus was so concerned
about sanctifying Jehovah’s name
that he did this on a regular basis,
reminding his closest associates how to pray.
What are the proper things to pray for?
The footnote on Matthew 6:9
is interesting for “be sanctified.”
It defines it as “be held sacred;
be treated as holy.”
And that really helps us to understand
what sanctification means.
But our Study Bible  really helps us,
as this point is put in a comment.
It says this in the Study Bible:
“This is a petition that all creation,
“including both humans and angels,
“hold God’s name holy.
“The petition also includes
the thought that God take action
“to sanctify himself
by clearing his name of the reproach
“that has been heaped on it
ever since the rebellion
of the first human pair
in the garden of Eden.”
Yes, toward the end of Jesus’ ministry,
he could confidently
and humbly approach Jehovah
and say at John 17:26:
“I have made your name known to them
and will make it known [to them].”
Those are the words
that we want to say as well
as we follow Jesus, our model.
And there’s no question, again,
that Jesus put Jehovah first.
He was a priority.
The sanctification of His name
was number one.
To sanctify God’s name,
for you and for me,
is more than just words.
It’s more than what we say in our prayer.
It’s what we do, what we put into action.
And we need to ask ourselves
on a daily basis,
‘Where is Jehovah in my life
when I’m making decisions
—how I treat others
and how I serve Jehovah?’
Yes, Jehovah must be
very happy when he looks down
at all those who
are tied in to this program
to see how they (you)
are putting Jehovah first.
You are simplifying your lives.
You’re sanctifying his name
by your work assignments,
in the congregation, in your actions,
and in your thoughts.
And many of us have been serving Jehovah
for many years, many decades.
But we must continue to ask,
‘Where’s Jehovah in my life?’
by making wise decisions,
even if we have
many years of faithful service.
The problem
with Jehovah’s people in the past,
his people, Israel,
was that they were supposed to be holy.
They were supposed to be sanctified,
set apart to do his will.
But many times, they did their own will.
Notice what the prophet Jeremiah
had to say on this subject
at Jeremiah 2:5, 6,
and notice the question that was posed
by Jeremiah to those people.
Jeremiah 2:5 says:
“This is what Jehovah says:
“‘What fault did your forefathers find in me,
“‘so that they strayed so far from me,
“‘and they walked after worthless idols
“‘and became worthless themselves?
“‘[This is the point.]
They did not ask,
“Where is Jehovah?”’”
It’s a simple question but profound.
And notice verse 8:
“[Even] the priests
“[who were supposed to be
holy, leading the people, they] did not ask,
“‘Where is Jehovah?’
“Those handling the Law did not know me,
“the shepherds rebelled against me,
“the prophets prophesied by Baal,
and they followed those
who could bring no benefit.”
Jehovah was not part of their lives.
They were doing
their own will, not Jehovah’s.
Now, it’s one thing
to follow Jehovah’s direction
to do his will
when things are going well,
when things are going
as we have anticipated,
but what about when
difficulties come upon us
—trialsome situations?
Then here comes the test.
Now, many of God’s servants
throughout the centuries
have proved their integrity
and their faithfulness
despite whatever
has been thrown against them.
Can you think of a Bible character
that had so much against him
—so many trials,
so many depressing situations—
and yet he was very faithful?
Are you thinking about Job?
He’s one of the characters
that we refer to many, many times.
Now, Job was a faithful man.
We know the end of the story.
But throughout his ordeals,
he was really tested and he lost focus.
He became shortsighted;
he became self-absorbed.
In a way, he replaced
all the windows in his home
with mirrors so that all he
could see was himself.
All he could see were his own problems.
So Jehovah used
the young man Elihu
to remind Job that he needed
to look at things
from a different perspective.
Notice Job chapter 35
—Job 35:9.
Elihu said:
“People cry out
when under great oppression;
“they cry for relief
from the domination of the powerful.
But no one says,
‘Where is God, my Grand Maker?’”
So he was trying to, really,
remind him of the big picture
—looking at things
from Jehovah’s standpoint.
And he helped Job remove those mirrors
so that he could look out his windows
—see Jehovah; see the big picture;
see his smallness
in comparison to Jehovah’s largeness.
In fact, if you go to Job chapter 42,
notice there his response
as he was readjusted
and humbly listened to these reminders.
At Job 42:3, he said:
“I spoke, but without understanding.”
Verse 5:
“My ears have heard about you,
“but now I do see you with my eyes.
“That is why I take back what I said,
and I repent in dust and ashes.”
Job’s experience is something
that we may have experienced
—some kind of trial,
some kind of discouraging experience.
There’s a very close friend of mine
who came into Bethel
around the same time as myself.
We got married around the same time,
and, unfortunately,
he lost his wife in death
a few years ago.
Now, that very month, what did he do?
Did he get depressed?
Did he quit?
He auxiliary pioneered.
And when I spoke to him and asked him,
“How could you have
such a focus, such a determination?”
he said:
“Well, I looked at it this way:
“Paul said that we are
“‘a theatrical spectacle
before men and angels.’
“I view myself
as this is my ‘Job moment.’
“So here I am.
I’m thrust onto the stage.
“Up in that balcony is Jehovah, Jesus,
“the resurrected anointed ones, the angels.
“They’re looking down at me,
“and there before me in the audience
“is the world
and my brothers and my sisters.
“And down in that orchestra pit
is Satan the Devil and the demons.
“Here I am. Lights are on.
“Everyone is looking at me.
“What am I going to do?
Will I run? Will I hide?
“Or is this my ‘Job moment’?
Is this where I prove my integrity?”
He did, and he continues to do so today.
What about us?
When we’re going
through discouraging circumstances
—our “Job moment”—
do we ask, Where is Jehovah?
Are we proving our integrity
by what we’re doing
—promoting Kingdom interests,
sanctifying Jehovah’s name?
Is that the number one thing in our life?
Are we doing that daily?
We need to ask ourselves
that on a daily basis.
Even when we’re giving talks,
when we’re dealing
with brothers and sisters
at work or in a congregation,
we need to ask,
Where is Jehovah?
And that will really change
our treatment of others,
how we view them,
and how we view ourselves.
So Jesus’ reminders
really help us to appreciate
that there’s a priority in what we pray for
and how we carry out those prayers
—always putting Jehovah
as the number one thing in our life,
knowing that all of our other requests,
our personal requests,
will be heard by Jehovah
and will be answered by him.